.MH "Messages from the Shell"
Listed here are messages with obscure meanings that are
produced by the Shell;
several indicate dire internal
problems that should not occur during normal operation.
In the interest of saving paper, self-explanatory messages
are not included.
.#
.# mg --- print message & indent
.#
.de mg
.sp
.ne 3
.ti -5
.bf
[1]
.br
.en mg
.#
.in +5
.rm -5
.lt +5
.mg "<command>: not found"
The list of elements in the search rule was exhausted, but
the command had not been located.
.mg "<command>: too many ci files"
The nesting depth of command files has been exceeded.  This is
usually caused by an infinitely recursive call on a command file.
The maximum nesting depth (currently 10) is a compile time
option of the shell and may be increased at the expense of
additional table space.
.mg "continue? "
This message occurs after each network when the "single_step"
shell trace option is set.  A line beginning with
anything other than an upper or lower case letter "n" will
cause the shell to execute the next network.  A response
beginning with "n" will cause the shell to return to command level.
.mg "illegal destination node spec"
The destination node specifier must be a defined label or
a number between 1 and the number of nodes in the network.
.mg "illegal port number"
A port number must be a number between 1 and the maximum
number of standard ports defined (currently 3).
.mg "missing command name"
Although an empty net is allowable, redirectors must not
be specified without a command name.
.mg "missing pathname in redirector"
A greater-than sign was encountered without a pathname on
either side.
.mg "net is not serially executable"
Because multiple processes per user are not supported,
each node of a net must be executed serially.
Therefore, nets which have pipe connections that
form a complete cycle cannot be executed.
.mg "overflow (save_state): <level>"
The nesting depth of command files has been exceeded.  This is
usually caused by an infinitely recursive call on a command file.
The maximum nesting depth (currently 10) is a compile time
option of the shell and may be increased at the expense of
additional table space.
.mg "pipe destination not found"
The destination node of a pipe is not in the range of the
current net.
.mg "state save stack overflow"
The nesting depth of command files has been exceeded.  This is
usually caused by an infinitely recursive call on a command file.
The maximum nesting depth (currently 10) is a compile time
option of the shell and may be increased at the expense of
additional table space.
.mg "unbalanced iteration groups"
Because of the semantics of iteration, each iteration
group in the same net must contain the same number
of arguments.
.mg "unexpected EOF on variable save file"
End of file has been encountered on the shell variable
save file when a value has been expected.  The shell
variables have been corrupted.  To recover what
might be left, exit the Subsystem with a <break>
or control-P and consult your system administrator.
.mg "whitespace required around pipe connector"
A pipe connector
and its associated port numbers and destination label
must be surrounded by spaces.
.mg "whitespace required around i/o redirector"
An i/o redirector and its associated i/o redirector
must be surrounded by spaces.
