.MH Overview
You are reading the [bf Software Tools Subsystem Manager's Guide].
The machine-readable text of this Guide is supplied with the
Subsystem in the file "=doc=/fguide/mgr" (already formatted)
and in the directory "=doc=/guide/mgr" (unformatted).
.SH Purpose
This Guide addresses the needs of the Subsystem Manager:  that
individual or small group of individuals that is responsible for
the installation, maintenance and daily operation of the
Subsystem.
.pp
Bringing up a large software system is a complicated process that
involves several bootstrapping steps.
In this case, the Subsystem Manager will be
responsible for at least three:
the installation of the Subsystem,
initial distribution of documentation, and creation of user
accounts.
.pp
Once the system is running and a sizable user community develops,
the responsibilities of the Manager will change.
In particular, he will control the generation and distribution
of new copies of documentation, maintain lists of active users,
update the description of the local hardware configuration,
and possibly modify the Subsystem itself by changing either
the system code or documentation.
.pp
It is the intent of this Guide to provide the Manager with
the information necessary to carry out these duties
and with procedures for their performance that are recommended
by the Subsystem's designers.
.pp
For further information on the philosophy and use of the Subsystem,
the reader is referred to the
[ul Software Tools Subsystem Reference Manual], the
[ul Software Tools Subsystem User's Guide],
and, of course, to Kernighan and Plauger's [ul Software Tools].
.SH "Summary of Contents"
This Guide is divided into five sections as outlined in the
following five paragraphs.
.pp
The [bf Subsystem Configuration]
section deals with the directory structure of the Subsystem.
It describes the standard configuration supplied on the Release Tape
as well as options for changing directory names, locating directories
on specific logical disks,
and storing certain portions of the Subsystem off-line.
.pp
The [bf Installation Procedure]
covers the initial installation of the Subsystem.
It catalogs the contents of the Subsystem Installation Package
and Release Tape, provides instructions for loading the tape,
and details the steps the Manager must take in order to
make the Subsystem operational.
.pp
The [bf Conversion Procedure] section describes the steps
necessary to update your current Subsystem to this release.
If you are a new customer, then you need only peruse this
section for various caveats, but not necessarily act upon
the information contained therein.
.pp
The section on [bf Documentation Structure]
describes the nature, coverage and physical location of all
Subsystem documentation.
Its two sub-sections correspond to the two major Subsystem
documents:  the [ul Software Tools Subsystem Reference Manual]
and the [ul Software Tools Subsystem User's Guide].
.pp
The day-to-day activities of the Subsystem Manager are covered
in [bf Subsystem Management].
Such concerns as maintaining user accounts and hardware configuration
files, adding local software tools and documentation, and operating
Subsystem user services are treated.
